In the previous video, we already learn
about sequence number in access list.
Next, in this video, we are going to
learn about named access list.
With named access list, we can configure
access list with a name, not only with id.
If you remember, in the previous video,
we configure access list with id 1,
remember that id 1 until 99 is standard access
list and 100 until 199 is extended access list.
Beside using number like this, we can
also configure access list with a name.
absolutely we still able to configure
standard or extended access list
with named access list. In this case, we are going
to learn about named standard access list first.
Okay let’s just start learning about named access
list with an example case. Let’s say we want to
block everything and only permit from vlan 30,
so vlan 10 and 20 to server should be blocked.
Let’s unassign access list 1 first,
let’s see the configuration, do show run,
here in fa0/0, we assign the access
list. Let’s remove this configuration,
no ip access-group 1 out.
Let’s see the configuration again,
okay here there is no access-group
configuration anymore in fa0/0.
But the access list configuration is still
exist. This configuration will not used,
because the access list is not assign to any
interface, let’s try ping from vlan 20 to server,
okay here the ping is success. So
access list 1 is not used anymore.
Let’s also ping from pc0 to the server,
success, from vlan 30 to the server,
also success. Okay so now all pc is
able to ping to the server again.
Now let’s create named access
list to only permit from vlan 30.
If we configure access list with number, we
can just type access-list and then the number,
but if want to configure named access list,
the command is ip and then access list,
Then here we need to define which access list
we want to configure, standard or extended.
In this case, we are going to
configure standard access list.
And then here we need to define the name of access
list. Or actually here we also still can use
a number. Let’s say the name is permit
vlan 30. And then question mark here,
if we configure named access list like
this, we can define a sequence number.
But for now I will not define the sequence number,
so the sequence number will
be created automatically.
The case is to only permit from vlan 30,
so let’s create a rule to permit vlan 30,
so here permit and then the network of
vlan 30, which is 192.168.30.0 0.0.0.255.
Let’s see the access list, do show access-list.
Here we can see that we have access list 1,
but this is not used anymore, and then
here we have access list permit vlan 30,
and here we have a rule to permit from vlan 30.
remember that the case is to only permit from
vlan 30, so vlan 10 and vlan 20 should be blocked.
If you remember, I already said that in access
list, there is a default rule to deny any.
So for now from vlan 10 and vlan
20 is already blocked, because here
we only create a rule to permit vlan 30. So
now the access list configuration is done.
Next let’s assign this
access list to the interface,
let’s say we will assign the access list to fa0/0,
So interface fa0/0, ip access-group
and then the name of the access list,
let’s just copy and paste,
And the direction is out.. okay
we have done configuring access
list and assign the access list
to the interface. Let’s test it,
vlan 30 to server, success, vlan 20 to the
server, failed, vlan 10 to the server also failed.
Okay so now we have done
configuring named access list.
I think enough for this video
Thank you for watching and see you on the next video.